In this video we'll learn about constructor initialization lists which are very useful for efficiently
initializing our objects data members.
So far we've written our code so that we initialize our data member values in the constructor body by
assigning values to them.
While this works it technically isn't initialization because by the time the constructor body is executed
these member attributes have already been created.
So we're really just assigning values to already created attributes.
I'll show you exactly what's happening when we head over to the ID and just a bit.
What we really want to do is have the member data values initialized to our values before the constructor
body executes.
This is much more efficient since it's true initialization C++ allows us to do this using constructor
initialization lists which is basically just the list of initializers immediately following the constructor
parameter list.
It sounds complicated but it's not.
Let me show you.
Here we have this same player class that we've been using in previous examples.
It has three overloaded constructors and if you recall from the previous videos we implemented them
using assignment statements in the constructor body.
You can see in the top section of this slide how we previously implemented the no args constructor in
the body of the constructor we use 3 assignment statements to set the attributes to the values we want.
While this works it can be inefficient in many cases for example.
By the time that we get to the statement.
Name equals none the name string object has already been constructed and initialized to an empty string.
So we're really just assigning a new string to it.
In this case to an existing object that's very different from initialization.
What we really want is to initialize the data members to our data values as they're created.
That's what constructor initialization lists allow us to do.
The bottom section of the slide shows how we could implement the same constructor in a more efficient
way.
Notice that immediately after the parameter list we provide a colon followed by a list of initializers.
In this case we're telling the C++ compiler to initialize name to none.
Health and Expwy to zero.
This happens before the body of the constructor is ever executed.
One thing to keep in mind the order in which the members are initialized is not necessarily the order
we provide in the initialization list.
The data members will be initialized in the order that they were declared in the class declaration.
So let's implement the rest of the constructors using initialization lists here we're implementing the
single string constructor.
Notice the previous way on the top section of the slide and the better way using an initialization list
below.
In this case we provide name value to initialize name and still use 0 for health and 0 for XP you kapala.
Yes how the three args constructor will look.
Here's the three args constructor at the bottom using the initializer list.
We're providing name Val helpful and XP out to the initializers and the complete refactoring looks something
like this.
Notice how in the constructor there's no code in the constructor body.
We can still write any code we want in the constructor body.
But now we can be sure that our data members have been initialized to our own values before any code
in the constructor body is executed.
Let's head over to the idea and we'll step through a few examples so you can see how much more efficient.
Constructor initialization this can be.
OK so I mean the ID and I'm in the section 13 workspace in the constructor initialization this project
and I've just got a simple main here that has our player class as I've discussed previously with three
overloaded constructors and no args a single string.
And the one that supplies the string and the two integers.
OK.
And I've implemented the constructors the way we've done previously using these assignment statements
inside the body of the constructor.
I've got some breakpoints in here that we'll walk through so that we can see exactly what's going on.
And then I'm creating three objects and creating empty using no arguments I'm creating.
Frank which is a point there are player objects frank with the single string and then the villain is
going to use this constructor here with the three arguments.
OK.
So let's work through this and we'll be real careful to look at that name attribute because that's really
the important one because it's an object.
So let's walk through this and right now we are on 9:41 right about here.
And I'm going to step through this and that we'll call the no args constructor that's this one right
up here on 9:21.
Since we're providing no information for initialization so I'm going to step through it and you can
see now the arrow here that little green arrows on line 22 that's where I'm at now we can't really see
if empty here because empty is out of scope we're now within the scope of this constructor right here.
And I'll talk about a variable called this a little bit later in the course.
Probably a few videos from now.
This represents the current object.
OK so if I expand this you can see that this is this current object that I'm building right here.
And you'll notice something interesting you'll notice that name is set to the empty string.
What does that tell you what that tells you that that was already initialized.
In other words that string object name its constructor was already called with no information and we
initialized it to an empty string.
So this line right here that says name equals none.
That's really not initializing anything.
All it's doing is assigning none to an already created object name right here.
That's really not what we'd like.
We'd like to initialize that object name immediately without having to initialize and then assigned
to it.
OK that can be very inefficient.
In the case of a very complex class you might have to create some sort of default constructor for it
and it's setting a lot of fields and maybe allocating things and then you're just going to deallocate
all that stuff and assigned to it again.
It really doesn't make sense if things become very inefficient.
So you can see in this case a walk keep walking through this and now we're going to set name to non-health
to zero you could see them right here on line 24 and Expedia 0 and I come back down to Main at this
point my player objects all refresh over here my empty player object is set to None 0 0.
Just like we expected.
But now let's create the Frank object.
So what do we do.
We're going to call the constructor that expects a single string which is this one right here on 9:27
and I'm going to go to that.
Now here on the unblind 28 again notice this represents the object that I'm creating right now and an
empty string again so I just created another object in this case.
I'll step through it really quickly.
And now I'm back here to play a villain which is going to call this constructor right here.
The three ARBs constructor and I'll do that.
And again here's this another object that was created.
So we just created three string objects and then get rid of basically the string the empty string they
pointed to and replaced it with Frank a villain and none so really really an inefficient thing to do.
And what I'll do is ouch.
I'll make one little change that hopefully will really help you understand this right now we're just
using that empty string.
But suppose that I initialize this here to some string that's really obvious like a bunch of XS.
OK.
And let's let's run this again or walk through it one more time and hopefully this time it'll really
be obvious what's going on.
OK so again I'm here on line 41 and I'm creating an empty player object so it's going to call the no
args constructor.
This one here.
So when I step through it you can see I'm now in line 22.
But if you look at the object take a look at name right there.
See all the X's.
So that tells you that some constructor for that string class is already executed and initialized that
string object.
Again that's not what we want to do.
OK so hopefully this of this is really clear as to what's going on what we want to do is we want to
use the initializer lists for the constructors and it's really simple to do what you do is immediately
after the parameter list right there you just put a colon and you can follow it by the initializer list
just like we did in the slides.
OK.
So in this case I'll do it on the next line.
So it's a little clearer there.
What we can do is we can tell it which attributes do we want to initialize.
In this case it's like name and we provide the initialiser which is the initializations value I should
say which is none.
Health
to zero.
All of these would be comma separated and Expwy also to zero.
That's it.
And then we don't need the body of the constructor anymore because we've already done the initialization.
We can certainly write any code we need here but we're sure that we're in the body of the constructor.
Those three attributes have now been initialized initialized correctly not initialized and then assigned
to but initialized.
OK so that takes care of that one.
We can also do the same for these here and I'll just do them really quickly.
And let me just copy this bit here.
And what we do here is we'll set name in this case we have the value to set it to.
It's going to be named Val and both still keep health and XP at zero and we'll get rid of the constructor
body will get rid of some of those breakpoints as well and clean up the code and you can see when you
do it this way you end up with empty bodies for the constructors and that's OK.
Obviously we want to put something else in there once our variables are created.
And this last one again I'll copy this one just to save a little time here.
We'll get rid of that and
then Dent that in there is my initialiser name Val in this case I've got health Val
and I've got X P-BO
and that's pretty much it.
I'll get rid of this.
And there you go.
That's the final refactoring.
You can see now we're using the initializer lists to initialize our objects which is exactly what we
want to do.
We get rid of the extra colon right there and that should do it.
Other thing is I put the order in here his name health and DXP that order doesn't really matter it's
going to be initialized in this order.
Name health Expwy whatever or you declare these guys and right here in your class that's the order that
the initialization will take place.
It just happens to be the same order that I've written here and that's pretty much a best practice is
to keep the order the same but don't rely on order here the order is going to be the order that you
declare these things in.
OK so there you go that's initialization list.
Now you do you will notice a few things.
We're going to talk about delegating constructors soon so we can get rid of some of this extra code
because if you think about this this is really the same as this.
It's the same as that and it's the same as that.
So we'll have a little bit even more efficient way of doing this.